>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JULY 15:
INSIDE PUTIN'S RUSSIA: THIS
OPPOSITION LEADER IS INSPIRING
THE YOUNGER GENERATION TO SPEAK
OUT.
HOMELAND SECURITY OFFICIALS WITH
A PLAN TO USE FACE SCANS AT
AMERICA'S AIRPORTS.
AND THE EXPANSION OF POWER AND
CRACKDOWN ON DISSENT ONE YEAR
AFTER A FAILED COUP IN TURKEY.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE NATION'S LARGEST INSURANCE
COMPANIES ARE REJECTING THE
SENATE'S LATEST BILL TO REPEAL
AND REPLACE PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
THE CURRENT BILL INCLUDES AN
AMENDMENT BY TEXAS SENATOR TED
CRUZ TO LET INSURERS SELL PLANS
THAT DON'T COMPLY WITH OBAMACARE
REGULATIONS, ALONGSIDE PLANS
THAT DO.
SUPPORTERS SAY THIS COULD LOWER
INSURANCE PREMIUMS AND INCREASE
CONSUMER CHOICE OVER OBAMACARE,
WHICH HAS LIFTED THE NUMBER OF
AMERICANS INSURED ABOVE 91%.
AMERICA'S HEALTH INSURANCE
PLANS, A LEADING HEALTH
INSURANCE LOBBYING GROUP, AND
BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD, THE
NATION'S LARGEST PROVIDER, SAID
THE CRUZ AMENDMENT IS
"UNWORKABLE IN ANY FORM."
IN A LETTER TO SENATE LEADERS,
THE INSURERS SAID THE AMENDED
BILL WOULD "UNDERMINE
PROTECTIONS FOR THOSE WITH PRE-
EXISTING MEDICAL CONDITIONS,
INCREASE PREMIUMS, AND LEAD TO
WIDESPREAD TERMINATIONS OF
COVERAGE FOR PEOPLE CURRENTLY
ENROLLED IN THE INDIVIDUAL
MARKET."
IN HIS WEEKLY ADDRESS, PRESIDENT
TRUMP URGED REPUBLICANS TO RALLY
BEHIND THE BILL EXPECTED TO COME
UP FOR A VOTE NEXT WEEK.
>> THE LEGISLATION WORKING ITS
WAY THROUGH CONGRESS PROVIDES
THE CHOICE AND CONTROL PEOPLE
WANT, THE AFFORDABILITY THEY
NEED, AND THE QUALITY THEY
DESERVE IN HEALTHCARE.
>> Sreenivasan: SIX HIGH SCHOOL
GIRLS FROM AFGHANISTAN, STYMIED
BY VISA ISSUES, FINALLY ARRIVED
IN WASHINGTON TODAY TO COMPETE
IN A ROBOTICS COMPETITION THAT
STARTS TOMORROW.
U.S. OFFICIALS HAD TWICE DENIED
THE ALL-GIRLS TEAM VISAS TO
TRAVEL TO THE U.S., APPARENTLY
DUE TO CONCERNS THEY MIGHT NOT
RETURN HOME.
THEN, THIS WEEK, PRESIDENT TRUMP
ASKED NATIONAL SECURITY
OFFICIALS TO CLEAR THEIR TRAVEL.
THE AFGHAN GIRLS WILL COMPETE
AGAINST CHILDREN FROM 150
COUNTRIES.
THE PIONEERING, IRANIAN-BORN
MATHEMATICIAN MIRYAM MIRZAKHANI
HAS DIED OF BREAST CANCER.
SHE WAS THE FIRST AND ONLY WOMAN
TO WIN THE PRESTIGIOUS FIELDS
MEDAL, IN 2014, FOR HER
CONTRIBUTIONS TO COMPLEX
GEOMETRY.
A STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR,
MIRZAKAHNI WAS 40 YEARS OLD.
IN CHINA TODAY, THE FAMILY OF
NOBEL PEACE PRIZE WINNER AND
POLITICAL PRISONER LIU XIAOBO
HELD A FUNERAL CONTROLLED BY THE
CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY.
THE GOVERNMENT LET THE FAMILY
SCATTER HIS ASHES INTO THE SEA,
ENSURING NO GRAVESITE WOULD EVER
BECOME A HUB FOR PROTESTERS.
THE 61-YEAR-OLD DIED OF
CANCER THIS WEEK AFTER EIGHT
YEARS OF IMPRISONMENT FOR
SUBVERTING STATE POWER.
THAT FOLLOWED HIS PUBLICATION OF
A MANIFESTO CALLING FOR AN END
TO CHINA'S ONE-PARTY RULE.
LAWMAKERS ARE CALLING FOR ACTION
ON INVASIVE SPECIES AFTER AN
ASIAN CARP WAS CAUGHT NEAR LAKE
MICHIGAN.
LEARN MORE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE YEAR AGO
TODAY, OUR TOP STORY WAS THE
FAILED COUP ATTEMPT IN TURKEY BY
RENEGADE SOLDIERS TRYING TO
TOPPLE PRESIDENT RECEP TAYYIP
ERDOGAN.
SINCE HIS SECURITY FORCES
STOPPED THE COUP, ERDOGAN HAS
CRACKED DOWN ON PERCEIVED
OPPONENTS, WITH TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF CIVIL SERVANTS
LOSING THEIR JOBS OR GOING TO
JAIL.
TODAY, HIS GOVERNMENT FIRED
7,000 MORE AS ERDOGAN ATTENDED A
"NATIONAL UNITY" MARCH IN THE
CAPITAL OF ANKARA AND UNVEILED A
MEMORIAL TO 250 TURKS WHO DIED
IN THE COUP.
IN THE PAST YEAR, ERDOGAN
OFFICIALLY EXPANDED HIS
EXECUTIVE POWERS IN A REFERENDUM
APPROVED BY A MAJORITY OF
VOTERS.
SONER CAGAPTAY, FROM THE
WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR NEAR
EAST POLICY, HAS WRITTEN A NEW
BOOK CALLED "THE NEW SULTAN:
ERDOGAN AND THE CRISIS OF MODERN
TURKEY."
HE JOINS ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON.
SO, IN THIS ONE-YEAR PERIOD,
WHAT'S HAPPENED TO TURKEY?
>> TURKEY HAS ACTUALLY NOT
BECOME MORE DEMOCRATIC,
UNFORTUNATELY.
ALTHOUGH THE COUP WAS PREVENTED,
IT HAS BECOME MORE AUTHORITARIAN
AND LESS DEMOCRATIC, AND THAT IS
PRIMARILY BECAUSE INITIALLY
GOING AFTER COUP PLOTTERS,
PRESIDENT ERDOGAN HAS THEN USED
THE POST-COUP POWERS, STATE OF
EMERGENCY, GIVEN TO HIM TO GO
AFTER HIS OTHER OPPONENTS.
TURKEY IS AN EXTREMELY POLARIZED
PLACE, WITH HALF OF THE COUNTRY
ADORING ERDOGAN, AND THE OTHER
HALF OF THE COUNTRY THAT
BASICALLY LOATHES HIM.
AND ERDOGAN HAS TARGETED
ANYONE IN THAT GROUP THAT
LOATHES HIM.
THAT NOT ONLY INCLUDES MEMBERS
OF THE GULEN MOVEMENT, WHO
ERDOGAN BELIEVES IS ALIGNED
WITH THE COUP EFFORT, BUT ALSO
LIBERALS, LEFTISTS AND KURDISH
NATIONALISTS.
>> Sreenivasan: ERDOGAN WILL
SAY, "LISTEN, I'M IN A... I'M
IN A ROUGH NEIGHBORHOOD.
THERE ARE PEOPLE ALL... IN PARTS
OF MY COUNTRY THAT WANT TO SPLIT
OFF AND BREAK OFF.
I'VE HAD TERRORIST ATTACK
HAPPENING ON MY OWN SOIL.
I NEED THIS POWER, I NEED IT
CONSOLIDATED."
AND HE'S... THAT MESSAGE HAS
SUNK IN WITH HIS SUPPORTERS.
>> IT HAS.
AND OF COURSE, ERDOGAN HAS A
BRIGHT SIDE, AS WELL-- THAT HE
HAS DELIVERED ECONOMIC GROWTH,
WHICH IS WHY THE CONSERVATIVES
HAVE BANDED AROUND HIM.
BUT HE ALSO HAS A DARK SIDE,
WHICH IS THAT HE HAS CRACKED
DOWN ON OPPOSTION AND ERODED
DEMOCRATIC CHECKS AND BALANCES.
THE PROBLEM IS, WHILE HALF OF
THE COUNTRY LOVES HIM, THE OTHER
HALF OF THE COUNTRY THAT
DESPISES HIM WILL NEVER FOLD
UNDER HIM.
AND THE RISK FOR ERDOGAN IS THAT
HE KNOWS, AS I EXPLAINED IN "THE
NEW SULTAN," HE KNOWS THAT HE
CANNOT CONTINUE TO GOVERN TURKEY
THE WAY HE LIKES SO LONG AS IT'S
DEMOCRATIC.
AND THAT IS WHY IT LOOKS TO ME
AND TO OTHER ANALYSTS THAT HE'S
TAKING STEPS TO END DEMOCRACY IN
TURKEY.
FOR EXAMPLE, HE'S JUST SAID THAT
THE STATE OF EMERGENCY PUT IN
PLACE AFTER THE COUP WILL BE
EXTENDED INDEFINTELY UNTIL THERE
IS PEACE AND WELFARE IN TURKEY.
HOW DO YOU MEASURE PEACE AND
WELFARE?
SO, THAT MEANS IT'S BASICALLY
PERMANENT.
AND FOR THE 40 MILLION TURKS WHO
OPPOSE HIM, THAT'S NOT
ACCEPTABLE.
SO, I FEAR THAT IF HE ENDS
DEMOCRACY, THERE'S DEFINITELY A
RISK FOR THAT HALF THAT OPPOSES
HIM WHO WILL NOW THINK THAT THEY
CANNOT VOTE HIM OUT.
THAT SOME ELEMENTS OF THEM,
MAYBE YOUTH ELEMENTS OF THEM,
MIGHT EVEN RADICALIZE.
SO, TURKEY'S POLARIZATION COULD
EVEN GET WORSE AS A RESULT OF
THESE POLICIES.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW MUCH OF
ERDOGAN'S POSITION IS BOLSTERED
BY THE CRUCIAL NATURE OF TURKEY
IN THE FIGHTING IN SYRIA OR IN
THE MIDDLE EAST?
I MEAN, IT SEEMS THAT THERE'S
SOME PRETTY HUGE ALLIES THAT ARE
COUNTING ON TURKEY'S SUPPORT.
>> I THINK ERDOGAN BASICALLY
KNOWS THAT THE UNITED STATES AND
NATO ALLIES NEED TURKEY TO
CONTINUE TO FIGHT ISIS, AND HE
BASICALLY GETS A HALL PASS IN
THAT REGARD.
DESPITE HIS DEMOCRATIC
TRANSGRESSIONS, HE'S STILL
INVITED TO SUMMITS AND
MEETINGS.
BUT THERE'S ONLY SO MUCH TURKEY
CAN CONTINUE WITH THIS POLARIZED
ENVIRONMENT, EVEN THOUGH ERDOGAN
MIGHT RECEIVE OPEN ARMS FROM
OUTSIDE DIGNITARIES, BECAUSE OF
THE FACT THAT SOME OF THE
OPPOSITION GROUPS ARE VIOLENT
AND RADICAL AND, IN FACT,
TERRORISTS SUCH AS THE KURDISH
GROUPS, P.K.K.
AND THEREFORE, GOING FORWARD,
HE'S GOING TO HAVE A VIOLENT
CHALLENGE COMING FROM THE RIGHT.
AND HE HAS ADVERSARIES IN THE
REGION, INCLUDING RUSSIA, WHOM
HE OPPOSES IN SYRIA, WHICH HAS
HISTORIC LINKS TO KURDISH GROUPS
WHICH COULD EASILY UNDERMINE
HIM GOING FORWARD.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, SONER
CAGAPTAY FROM THE WASHINGTON
INSTITUTE FOR NEAR EAST POLICY
AND THE AUTHOR OF THE NEW BOOK,
"THE NEW SULTAN: ERDOGAN AND THE
CRISIS OF MODERN TURKEY."
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
IT'S A PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL WEEK THE
NEWSHOUR, WITH THE SUPPORT OF
THE PULITZER CENTER ON CRISIS
REPORTING, HAS FEATURED STORIES
IN OUR SERIES "INSIDE PUTIN'S
RUSSIA," AND WE BRING YOU OUR
FINAL INSTALLMENT TONIGHT.
VLADIMIR PUTIN IS SERVING A
THIRD TERM AS RUSSIA'S PRESIDENT
AND IS EXPECTED TO SEEK A FOURTH
NEXT YEAR.
HE HAS BEEN WIDELY POPULAR SINCE
FIRST COMING TO POWER AS PRIME
MINISTER IN 1999.
BUT THIS SPRING SAW THE LARGEST
ANTI-GOVERNMENT DEMONSTRATIONS
INSIDE RUSSIA IN YEARS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT NICK
SCHIFRIN AND PRODUCER ZACH
FANNIN INTRODUCE US TO THE
GROWING OPPOSITION MOVEMENT AND
ONE OF ITS KEY LEADERS.
>> Reporter: THIS IS THE SEASON
OF RUSSIA'S DISCONTENT.
UNDER PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN,
THERE'S BEEN A TACIT AGREEMENT
THAT PEOPLE ENJOY THEIR LIVES
AND STAY OUT OF POLITICS.
NOW, MANY RUSSIANS ARE DECIDING
THAT BARGAIN'S NO LONGER WORTH
IT.
>> (translated): UNTIL
RECENTLY, PEOPLE WERE THINKING
POLITICS WERE SOMEWHERE FAR
AWAY.
BUT NOW, PEOPLE UNDERSTAND
POLITICS HITS CLOSE TO HOME.
>> Reporter: 38-YEAR-OLD ALEXEY
KOTOROV AND HIS NEIGHBORS HAD
CONSIDERED THEMSELVES
APOLITICAL, BUT THEY LAUNCHED
THESE PROTESTS WHEN THE CITY OF
MOSCOW PLANNED TO EVICT THEM
FROM THEIR APARTMENTS TO KNOCK
THEM DOWN AND BUILD HIGH RISES.
AS ALWAYS, POLICE PRESENCE WAS
STRONG.
BUT SOME RUSSIANS' FEAR OF THEIR
STATE SEEMS TO BE FADING, AND
FAITH IN THEMSELVES, RISING.
DO YOU THINK YOU CAN MAKE A
DIFFERENCE?
>> (translated): WE CAN CHANGE
THINGS IF WE STAY TOGETHER.
WE NEED TO STAY ACTIVE.
IT'S VERY IMPORTANT RIGHT NOW TO
RECREATE CIVIL SOCIETY.
FOR THE LAST FIVE YEARS, CIVIL
SOCIETY HAS ALMOST DISAPPEARED.
>> Reporter: IN THE 1960s, THE
FORMER SOVIET UNION BUILT
KOTOREV'S APARTMENT COMPLEX AS
INEXPENSIVE HOUSING...
>> SO, THIS IS YOUR HOME?
>> THIS IS MY HOME.
>> Reporter: ...FOR PEOPLE LIKE
HIM TO HAVE THEIR OWN SPACE.
INSIDE, IT'S NICE, WITH A VIEW
OF THE MOSCOW RIVER.
KOTOREV ACCUSES LOCAL OFFICIALS
OF WANTING TO SEIZE VALUABLE
LAND TO GET RICH.
>> (translated): NOW IS A VERY
IMPORTANT MOMENT.
THE PEOPLE ARE STARTING TO UNITE
TO SHOW THE GOVERNMENT THEIR
POINT OF VIEW.
>> Reporter: THE MAN MOST
RESPONSIBLE FOR CREATING THAT
UNITY IS ALEXEI NAVALNY.
THE 41-YEAR-OLD LAWYER IS THE
COUNTRY'S MOST PROMINENT
OPPOSITION POLITICIAN ON A
CRUSADE AGAINST CORRUPTION.
HE CALLS THE RULING UNITED
RUSSIA PARTY, "THE PARTY OF
CROOKS AND THIEVES."
IN MARCH, HE POSTED AN HOUR-LONG
YOUTUBE EXPOSE ABOUT MANSIONS,
YACHTS AND LAND THAT HE SAYS
WERE CORRUPTLY ACQUIRED BY
PUTIN'S PRIME MINISTER, DMITRY
MEDVEDEV.
>> (translated): MEDVEDEV CAN
STEAL SO MUCH AND SO OPENLY
BECAUSE PUTIN DOES THE SAME, BUT
ON A GREATER SCALE.
THE SYSTEM IS SO ROTTEN, THERE'S
NOTHING HEALTHY LEFT.
>> Reporter: NAVALNY'S BEEN
FIGHTING PUTIN FOR SIX YEARS.
IN 2011, HE SPARKED MASSIVE
PROTESTS AHEAD OF A
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTION HE CALLED
RIGGED.
>> (translated): IT'S VERY
SIMPLE: POWER TO THE PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: TWO YEARS LATER, HE
RAN UNSUCCESSFULLY FOR MOSCOW
MAYOR AGAINST THE PUTIN-BACKED
INCUMBENT.
TODAY, BY USING YOUTUBE, NAVALNY
CIRCUMVENTS STATE-RUN MEDIA AND
MAINTAINS A HUGE FOLLOWING.
THIS VIDEO HAS 23 MILLION VIEWS.
>> (translated): THIS IS OUR
COUNTRY, AND THESE SWINDLERS ARE
STEALING OUR MONEY.
EVERYONE SHOULD FIGHT HOWEVER HE
CAN.
>> Reporter: TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE ANSWERED HIS CALL.
ON MARCH 26 AND JUNE 12,
RUSSIANS LAUNCHED THE MOST
WIDESPREAD UNSANCTIONED PROTESTS
IN A QUARTER CENTURY.
THEY WERE HELD IN 185 CITIES.
NEARLY ALL THE PROTESTERS WERE
YOUNG AND MOTIVATED TO SPEAK OUT
BY CORRUPTION.
"PUTIN'S A THIEF," THEY CHANTED.
"POLICE, JOIN THE PEOPLE," THEY
SAY.
"DON'T SERVE THE GOVERNMENT OF
MONSTERS."
POLICE DECLINED THEIR INVITATION
AND ARRESTED 1,700 PROTESTERS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, INCLUDING
NAVALNY.
HE WAS SENTENCED TO 25 DAYS IN
JAIL FOR ORGANIZING AN
UNSANCTIONED RALLY.
HE WAS ALSO ARRESTED AND JAILED
IN MARCH.
AND BACK IN 2014, HE WAS
CONVICTED OF A FELONY:
DEFRAUDING CLIENTS OF A SHIPPING
COMPANY HE HELPED HIS BROTHER,
OLEG, START.
OLEG REMAINS IN PRISON.
ALEXEI CALLS HIS BROTHER A
HOSTAGE AND THE CHARGES
FABRICATED, BUT HIS CONVICTION
MEANS LEGALLY HE CAN'T RUN FOR
OFFICE.
THAT HASN'T STOPPED HIM FROM
CAMPAIGNING FOR NEXT YEAR'S
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
>> (translated): WE DO NOT OWE
THE GOVERNMENT ANYTHING.
IT IS THE GOVERNMENT WHO OWES
US.
THEY BUILD AN AUTHORITARIAN
REGIME THAT DOESN'T GIVE
ANYTHING BACK.
>> Reporter: HIS RALLIES ARE
UNUSUAL IN A COUNTRY WHERE
RETAIL CAMPAIGNING IS ALMOST
UNHEARD OF.
THE CROWDS ARE YOUNG, AND HE
TALKS LIKE THEM.
>> (translated): THEY THINK WE
HAVE NO RIGHT TO ASK QUESTIONS,
THAT WE HAVE TO SHUT UP AND
LISTEN.
THEY TELL US, "(BLEEP) YOU,"
AND WE HAVE TO SAY, "OH, OKAY,
WE'RE VERY SORRY."
BUT NO, WE HAVE GATHERED HERE TO
SAY WE'RE GOING TO ASK THESE
QUESTIONS, AND WE'LL OBTAIN THE
ANSWERS.
>> HIS ANTI... ANTI-CORRUPTION
MESSAGE RESONATES WITH ME, AND I
THINK THAT HE'S A VERY
CHARISMATIC POLITICIAN.
>> Reporter: 23-YEAR-OLD KIRIL
KOZLOVSKY-- AND ANYONE IN THE
CROWD WHO WANTED ONE-- GOT A
PHOTO WITH NAVALNY.
KOZLOVKSY PROMPTLY POSTED IT TO
HIS PROFILE ON VK, RUSSIA'S
EQUIVALENT OF FACEBOOK.
KOSLOVSKY ACKNOWLEDGES THAT
PUTIN HAS BROUGHT RELATIVE
PROSPERITY TO RUSSIA.
HE'S NOT EVEN OLD ENOUGH TO
REMEMBER THE POLITICAL AND
ECONOMIC CHAOS THAT PUTIN HELPED
END WHEN HE CAME TO POWER IN
1999.
WHAT WOULD YOU SAY TO YOUR
PARENTS OR GRANDPARENTS WHO SAY,
"LOOK, THINGS WERE A LOT WORSE
FOR US BEFORE PRESIDENT PUTIN"?
>> IN THE 18 YEARS THAT HAVE
PASSED, HE AND HIS TEAM COULD
HAVE DONE A LOT MORE TO HELP THE
SITUATION, A LOT MORE TO MAKE IT
BETTER.
AND HE DIDN'T.
SO, HE'S TO BLAME FOR THIS.
>> Reporter: IN CHEBOKSARY, 375
MILES EAST OF MOSCOW, THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT MADE SURE NO ONE IN
THE CITY CENTER WOULD RENT SPACE
TO THE NAVALNY CAMPAIGN, SO HIS
GATHERINGS TAKE PLACE ON THE
EDGE OF TOWNS, LIKE THIS
APARTMENT COMPLEX.
SEMYON KOCHKIN IS THE LOCAL
CAMPAIGN MANAGER.
>> (translated): WE WERE
REJECTED BY ALL THE LANDLORDS,
BY ALL THE HOTELS, EVEN THE
INTERNATIONAL HOTELS.
EVEN CONSTRUCTION FIELDS
REJECTED US.
>> Reporter: KOCHKIN SAYS HE'S
BEEN TARGETED PERSONALLY.
LAST YEAR, ON VK, HE POSTED A
CLIP FROM COMEDIAN JOHN OLIVER'S
HBO PROGRAM, "LAST WEEK
TONIGHT."
>> SCAMMING ISIS IS THE BEST
THING ANYONE DID ON EARTH THIS
WEEK!
>> Reporter: THE VIDEO SHOWS
BANNED ISIS SYMBOLS, AND KOCHKIN
WAS ARRESTED FOR EXTREMISM.
HE TOOK A SELFIE IN THE BACK OF
A POLICE CAR.
HE ACCUSES THE GOVERNMENT OF
EXPLOITING ANTI-TERRORISM LAWS
TO SILENCE NAVALNY'S CAMPAIGN.
>> (translated): WE ARE
CONSTANTLY FIGHTING WITH THE
AUTHORITIES, AND IT'S ALWAYS
ONE-SIDED.
BECAUSE WHEN IT COMES TO
ELECTION SEASON, THEY MAKE IT
IMPOSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: LOCAL POLICE ALSO
ARRESTED 35-YEAR-OLD ANDREI
USIPOV.
HE'S THE LOCAL ORCHESTRA'S FIRST
VIOLIN.
ON MARCH 26, HE JOINED THE
NAVALNY PROTEST, AND, A WEEK
LATER, POLICE INTERRUPTED A
REHEARSAL TO TAKE HIM TO JAIL.
I ASKED HIM IF HE THOUGHT HE'D
BE ARRESTED FOR PROTESTING IF
NAVALNY WERE PRESIDENT.
>> (translated): I AM
ABSOLUTELY CERTAIN THIS WOULD
NOT HAPPEN BECAUSE, UNDER ALEXEI
NAVALNY, THE COUNTRY WILL BE
MORE OPEN.
ALEXEI IS FOR TRANSPARENCY, AND
ONLY WITH TRANSPARENCY CAN WE
OVERPOWER CORRUPTION.
>> Reporter: ARRESTS ARE ONLY
ONE WAY THE RUSSIAN
ESTABLISHMENT PUSHES BACK.
STATE TV PORTRAYS NAVALNY'S
PROTESTS AS AN EXISTENTIAL
THREAT TO RUSSIA'S STABILITY.
LISTEN TO WHAT THE COUNTRY'S
MOST POPULAR ANCHOR SAID LAST
MONTH:
>> (translated): THEY USE
PEOPLE TO PROVOKE THE CROWD AND
MAKE THE SITUATION SPIRAL OUT OF
CONTROL, ACHIEVING CHAOS.
FIRST, IN ONE SQUARE IN ONE
CITY, AND THEN THEY PLUNGE THE
ENTIRE COUNTRY INTO POVERTY
AND-- I'M AFRAID TO SAY-- CIVIL
WAR.
>> Reporter: GOVERNMENT-RUN HIGH
SCHOOLS FORCE STUDENTS TO WATCH
A VIDEO COMPARING NAVALNY TO
HITLER, ACCUSING HIM OF BEING A
FASCIST TRYING TO UNDERMINE THE
STATE.
BUT FOR THE FIRST TIME IN A
GENERATION, YOUNG PEOPLE ARE
REJECTING THE GOVERNMENT'S
TALKING POINTS.
IN A CLASSROOM 2,000 MILES FROM
MOSCOW, STUDENTS POSTED A VIDEO
OF THEMSELVES CHALLENGING A
GOVERNMENT-FUNDED SCHOOL TEACHER
WHO CALLED NAVALNY'S SUPPORTERS
FREAKS AND DEFENDED CORRUPTION.
>> Reporter: THE PRESSURE ON
NAVALNY HIMSELF IS SOMETIMES
PHYSICAL.
LAST YEAR, MEMBERS OF THE PRO-
GOVERNMENT COSSACKS DOUSED
NAVALNY WITH MILK AND BEAT UP
HIS STAFF.
IN APRIL, A STATE TV CHANNEL
SHOWED AN ASSAILANT AFTER HE
SPRAYED NAVALNY WITH GREEN DYE
AND CHEMICALS.
NAVALNY'S RIGHT EYE NEEDED
SURGERY.
NAVALNY ACCUSED THE KREMLIN OF
ORGANIZING THE ATTACK.
>> (translated): EVEN IF I
LOOK LIKE THIS, DOES THAT MEAN
THAT WE WILL ACCEPT MONEY'S BEEN
STOLEN AND USED TO BUY YACHTS?
I DON'T THINK SO.
>> Reporter: NAVALNY'S POLL
NUMBERS REMAIN LOW, BUT HE'S
CHANGING PUBLIC OPINION.
TWO-THIRDS OF RUSSIANS NOW
IDENTIFY CORRUPTION AS THE
COUNTRY'S NUMBER ONE PROBLEM.
PRESIDENT PUTIN AVOIDS
RESPONDING TO NAVALNY
SUBSTANTIVELY.
BUT THE NAVALNY EFFECT MEANS AT
A TOWN HALL IN MOSCOW, WHERE
QUESTIONS ARE USUALLY SCREENED
IN ADVANCE, THIS TEENAGER DARED
TO ASK PUTIN ABOUT CORRUPT
OFFICIALS UNDERMINING THE
PUBLIC'S FAITH IN GOVERNMENT.
>> (translated): HOW ARE YOU
PLANNING TO SOLVE THIS PROBLEM?
>> Reporter: PUTIN RESPONDED:
>> (translated): YOU READ YOUR
QUESTION.
DID YOU PREPARE IT YOURSELF, OR
DID SOMEONE PUT YOU UP TO IT?
>> (translated): LIFE PREPARED
ME FOR THIS QUESTION.
(LAUGHTER AND APPLAUSE)
>> Reporter: WHILE HE'S INSPIRED
THE YOUNGER GENERATION, SOME
FELLOW PUTIN OPPONENTS CRITICIZE
NAVALNY FOR BEING A NATIVIST.
SIX YEARS AGO, HE RELEASED
VIDEOS COMPARING IMMIGRANTS WHO
WORK IN RUSSIA TO COCKROACHES.
NAVALNY STANDS BY THE VIDEOS AND
SAYS HE WANTS TO APPEAL TO
NATIONALISTS, WHICH IS WHY HE
RARELY CRITICIZES PUTIN'S
MUSCULAR AND POPULAR FOREIGN
POLICY IN UKRAINE AND SYRIA.
NAVALNY TURNS DOWN INTERVIEW
REQUESTS-- INCLUDING OURS-- AND
TRIES TO KEEP THE FOCUS ON
CORRUPTION.
YOU SAVE YOUR HARSHEST CRITICISM
OF THE PRESIDENT FOR HIS
DOMESTIC POLICY, OBVIOUSLY, NOT
HIS FOREIGN POLICY.
IN FACT, YOU DON'T TALK VERY
MUCH ABOUT HIS FOREIGN POLICY.
IS THAT BECAUSE YOU AGREE WITH
MOST OF IT?
>> (translated): I DON'T TALK
A LOT ABOUT FOREIGN POLICY
BECAUSE HERE EVERYONE IS
INTERESTED IN WAGES, INCOME AND
BAD ROADS.
>> Reporter: HE TRIES TO FEED
POPULISM TO AN AUDIENCE THAT'S
HUNGRY.
HE HIGHLIGHTS GOVERNMENT
CORRUPTION TO PEOPLE WHO FEEL
THEY HAVE NOTHING TO LOSE.
AND HE'S TRYING TO CONVINCE A
GENERATION-- AND PERHAPS THE
COUNTRY-- THAT POLITICS REQUIRES
PARTICIPATION.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME TIME SOON,
YOU COULD HAVE YOUR FACE SCANNED
AS YOU BOARD AN OVERSEAS FLIGHT.
IT'S ALREADY BEING TESTED IN A
HANDFUL OF AMERICAN AIRPORTS,
WITH TWO AIRLINES-- DELTA AND
JETBLUE-- DIRECTLY
PARTICIPATING.
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY SEES THIS SYSTEM AS A
TOOL TO CATCH IMMIGRANTS
OVERSTAYING THEIR VISAS.
BUT AS THE PROGRAM EXPANDS, IT
WILL TAKE PHOTOS NOT JUST OF
FOREIGNERS BUT U.S. CITIZENS, AS
WELL.
THIS RAISES SECURITY, ACCURACY
AND PRIVACY QUESTIONS.
JOINING ME NOW FROM HOUSTON TO
DISCUSS THIS IS ASSOCIATED PRESS
REPORTER FRANK BAJAK.
FRANK, FIRST OF ALL, JUST LAY
OUT THIS EXPERIMENT, OR LAY OUT
HOW THIS IS ROLLING OUT FOR
US.
>> WELL, INTERESTINGLY, IT'S NOT
REALLY AN EXPERIMENT BECAUSE THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
SAYS THAT IT INTENDS TO GO AHEAD
WITH THIS AT ALL HIGH-VOLUME
AIRPORTS BEGINNING IN 2018.
NOW, THIS IS A PROGRAM THAT
STARTED OUT AS APPLYING ONLY TO
WHAT THEY CALL NON-IMMIGRANT
FOREIGNERS-- AND THAT'S, LIKE,
50 MILLION PEOPLE WHO VISIT THE
UNITED STATES ANNUALLY-- TO MAKE
SURE THAT THEY'RE NOT
OVERSTAYING VISAS AND TO KEEP
BETTER TRACK OF THAT.
CONGRESS HAS NOT EXPLICITLY
APPROVED THIS FOR U.S. CITIZENS,
BUT CUSTOMS AND BORDER
PROTECTION, WHICH IS PART OF
HOMELAND SECURITY, SAYS THAT
THEY CAN ONLY DO THIS IF THEY DO
IT FOR EVERYONE, INCLUDING U.S.
CITIZENS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHAT HAPPENS
TO THIS INFORMATION?
SAY I TAKE MY PHOTO, OR THE
AIRLINES TAKE MY PHOTO, OR
C.P.B. GETS MY PHOTO.
WHERE DOES IT GO?
>> WELL, FIRST OF ALL, EVERY
U.S. CITIZEN NOW HAS IN THEIR
PASSPORT A LITTLE CHIP THAT HAS
THE BIOMETRIC INFORMATION.
IT HAS THEIR BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION, WHERE THEY LIVE,
ET CETERA, THEIR BIRTH DATE.
AND IT'S GOT A PHOTO WHICH IS
ENCODED IN THAT CHIP.
IT CAN USE THAT INFORMATION TO
COMPARE IT AGAINST, SAY,
OUTSTANDING ARREST WARRANTS.
BASICALLY, IF SOMEONE IS WANTED
FOR A CRIME.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS IT'S NOT
GOING TO RETAIN THIS
INFORMATION, IT'S NOT GOING TO
KEEP RECORDS OF THIS
INFORMATION, BUT THE BORDER
PATROL OFFICIAL I SPOKE TO SAID
THAT THEY'RE NOT PRECLUDING THAT
IN THE FUTURE THEY COULD RETAIN
THAT INFORMATION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT
THE ACCURACY OF THESE IMAGES,
THESE IMAGE RECOGNITION?
LET'S SAY YOU GET CAUGHT IN KIND
OF A FACE SCAN TRAP AND THERE'S
A FLAG, BUT IT'S... IT'S A CASE
OF MISTAKEN IDENTITY.
>> WELL, FACIAL RECOGNITION
TECHNOLOGY IS STEADILY IMPROVING
OVER THE YEARS.
AND IT'S NOW... THE BEST OF IT
IS AT 90% TO 95% ACCURACY.
HOWEVER, THE EXPERTS THAT I
TALKED TO SAID THAT THERE ARE
APT TO BE MISMATCHES.
AND IF THERE IS A MISMATCH, WHAT
CAN HAPPEN?
FIRST OF ALL, IT CAN CAUSE
TRAVELING DELAYS.
IF YOU'RE BOARDING AN
INTERNATIONAL FLIGHT OF 500
PASSENGERS, YOU'RE LOOKING AT UP
TO 50 PEOPLE WHO ARE GOING TO
GET STOPPED AND HAVE TO GO
THROUGH A MANUAL CHECK.
BUT THE ISSUE IS ALSO ON THAT
MISMATCH, WHAT IF I'VE GOT AN
IDENTICAL TWIN WHO'S A WANTED
FUGITIVE?
WELL, IS THAT GOING TO FLAG ME?
>> Sreenivasan: I KNOW IN THE
PAST THERE WERE SOME CONCERNS
THAT THESE ALGORITHMS AREN'T
VERY GOOD AT IDENTIFYING OR
MISIDENTIFYING WOMEN OR PEOPLE
OF COLOR BECAUSE OF THE SAMPLE
SET THAT THEY USED.
>> INDEED, THAT'S TRUE.
IN FACT, THERE'S A RESEARCHER AT
M.I.T. MEDIA LAB WHO'S LOOKED
INTO THIS, AND HE SAYS THAT
THERE IS A BIAS AGAINST PEOPLE
OF COLOR BECAUSE OF THE
SELECTION IN TESTS THAT'S BEEN
USED.
BUT I THINK THAT THE BIGGER
QUESTION THAT CONCERNS THE
PRIVACY EXPERTS IS, IT'S VERY
EASY TO QUICKLY NOW COMPARE
THESE TO THE FACE PRINTS OF
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE FROM
OTHER DATABASES INSTANTANEOUSLY,
AND I THINK THAT THIS IS THE
WORRY.
>> Sreenivasan: FRANK BAYAK
FROM THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
JOINING US FROM HOUSTON TODAY.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: MODERN-DAY
MEXICO CITY WAS ONCE THE CAPITOL
OF THE AZTEC EMPIRE, WITH THE
ANCIENT CITY OF TENOCHTITLAN
CONTAINING ITS MOST SACRED
SHRINES.
THAT'S WHAT A NEW ARCHAEOLOGICAL
DISCOVERY, INCLUDING SOME OF THE
FINEST AZTEC GOLD EVER FOUND, IS
CURRENTLY BEING UNEARTHED.
THE REMAINS OF A YOUNG WOLF
COVERED IN GOLD IS BEING
EXCAVATED IN A SITE IN THE HEART
OF MEXICO CITY.
ARCHEOLOGISTS HAVE FOUND 22
COMPLETE PIECES OF GOLD,
INCLUDING A CHEST PLATE AND
PENDANTS.
THE EIGHT MONTH OLD WOLF WAS
SACRIFICED BY THE AZTECS BEFORE
BEING BURIED WITH THE GOLD,
FLINT KNIVES, AND SEA SHELLS IN
A STONE BOX MORE THAN 500 YEARS
AGO.
THE WOLF REPRESENTED THE AZTEC'S
WAR AND SOLAR GOD, AND WAS
BELIEVED TO HELP GUIDE FALLEN
WARRIORS IN THE AFTERLIFE.
PROJECT DIRECTOR LEONARDO LOPEZ
SAYS THE DISCOVERY OF THE
REMAINS AND PRECIOUS OBJECTS IS
EXCEPTIONAL.
>> (translated): THE WOLF WAS
ADDED TO THESE GOLD-LAMINATED
PIECES AS JOINT SYMBOLS OF
DEATH, WAR AND SACRIFICE.
>> Reporter: THE DISCOVERY WAS
MADE IN APRIL NEAR THE STEPS OF
THE MOST SACRED AZTEC TEMPLE
AFTER TWO BUILDINGS THAT ONCE
COVERED THE SITE IN DOWNTOWN
MEXICO CITY WERE DEMOLISHED.
IN 1900, THE BOX THAT CONTAINED
THE TROVE OF GOLD WAS DAMAGED
WHEN A SEWER LINE WAS INSTALLED
DIRECTLY NEXT TO IT.
BUT ARCHEOLOGISTS WORKING ON THE
SITE BELIEVE THE WORKERS MUST
NOT HAVE NOTICED THE CACHE,
LEAVING THE CONTENTS
UNDISTURBED.
WHILE THE SITE HAS BEEN STUDIED
FOR MORE THAN FOUR DECADES,
LOPEZ BELIEVES THAT THIS AREA
COULD STILL YIELD MORE
ARCHEOLOGICAL FINDS IN THE
FUTURE.
>> (translated): WE ARE
CONVINCED THAT THAT THIS IS THE
AREA WHERE THEY BURIED THEIR
RULERS BECAUSE IN RECENT YEARS
WE HAVE KEPT FINDING ALTARS.
BUT THE PROBLEM IS THAT WE ARE
SURROUNDED BY BUILDINGS WHICH
ARE COLONIAL JEWELS, AND WE
CANNOT AND WILL NOT DEMOLISH
THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SUNDAY, THE LARGEST
FINANCIAL CRISIS IN PUERTO
RICO'S HISTORY SPARKS TOUGH
AUSTERITY MEASURES.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.